Survival and sustainability – and when I say sustainability I don’t mean a buzz word at the bottom of your menu – sustainable as it applies to survival. At some point in our human development we became aware of our own mortality. This was no longer an inanimate pile of meat and bone… this was our friend, our companion, and they’re no longer here. So of course, after the panic subsides, first question out of our mouths is, “why? why are they no longer here?” and then the survival instinct kicks in and you have to ask yourself, “what happened, and how can I prevent this from happening to me? Or, at the very least, put off the inevitable?” – At this point, our very survival was continued upon our creativity and how we can stay ahead of the threat. We needed to find more consistent forms of food, more effective forms of shelter and clothing. We needed to stay ahead of the threat. We needed to use every fiber of our imagination, every spark of our creative energy, to stay ahead of the threat. Otherwise, it was likely that this day might very well be our last. So here we are, talking monkeys … we began to observe, and interpret, and report, and soon, patterns emerged, though trial and error we discovered the appropriate responses to these challenges and threats to our lives. And we rehearsed these responses, these movements, these actions and reactions, until they became skills. And these skills were rehearsed not only in-context, but out of context as well. In the form of ritual, and dance, and prose, and images. So by day, we gather, we cultivate, we build… and by night, we recount, we perform, we share, we rehearse… as well as celebrate our survival of another day around a central fire. This was a time in our history when the artistic and the utilitarian were in perfect balance. Survival, through art and utility.
Puscifer is a lot of things. One thing it’s definitely about is an attempt to reconnect with that seemingly lost balance. Because we believe that life is too short not to create something with every breath we draw.
So here we are, we figured out ways to secure food, clothing and shelter to the point where we’re pretty cozy. Every now and then there’s an individual who decides he has to go reconnect. The best place to go reconnect – get out of the rat race – is of course, the desert. The desert is a beautiful and dangerous place. This beautiful and dangerous place known as the desert is where one goes to either find, or lose themselves. Welcome to Puscifer.
